IMPLEMENTATION-BACKEND.md, before:

# Backend Implementation

## Overview
Rust-based REST API using Actix-web 4.x with PostgreSQL integration and comprehensive test coverage. The backend has been refactored with a modular service architecture, enhanced admin capabilities, and comprehensive testing infrastructure.

## Technology Stack
- **Language**: Rust 1.89.0
- **Framework**: Actix-web 4.x
- **Database**: SQLx with PostgreSQL
- **Serialization**: Serde
- **Environment**: dotenv
- **Testing**: actix-test
- **Logging**: env_logger

## Project Structure
```
backend/
├── src/
│   ├── main.rs           # Application entry point
│   ├── lib.rs            # Library exports
│   ├── models/           # Database models
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Module exports
│   │   ├── user.rs       # User model + auth requests
│   │   ├── incident_timer.rs # Incident timer model
│   │   └── phrase.rs     # Phrase and suggestion models
│   ├── repositories/     # Repository layer (3-layer architecture)
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Repository exports
│   │   ├── traits/       # Repository trait definitions
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs
│   │   │   ├── user_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── refresh_token_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── incident_timer_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── phrase_repository.rs
│   │   │   └── admin_repository.rs
│   │   ├── postgres/     # PostgreSQL implementations
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs
│   │   │   ├── postgres_user_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── postgres_refresh_token_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── postgres_incident_timer_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── postgres_phrase_repository.rs
│   │   │   └── postgres_admin_repository.rs
│   │   └── mocks/        # Mock implementations for testing
│   │       ├── mod.rs
│   │       ├── mock_user_repository.rs
│   │       ├── mock_refresh_token_repository.rs
│   │       ├── mock_incident_timer_repository.rs
│   │       ├── mock_phrase_repository.rs
│   │       └── mock_admin_repository.rs
│   ├── routes/           # API route handlers
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Route configuration with public/protected/admin scoping
│   │   ├── auth.rs       # Authentication endpoints
│   │   ├── incident_timers.rs # Timer CRUD + public endpoints
│   │   ├── phrases.rs    # Phrase management endpoints
│   │   ├── admin.rs      # Admin user management and phrase moderation endpoints
│   │   └── health.rs     # Health check endpoints
│   ├── services/         # Business logic layer
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Service exports
│   │   ├── container.rs  # ServiceContainer for dependency injection
│   │   ├── auth/         # Authentication services (modularized)
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs    # Auth service exports
│   │   │   ├── jwt.rs    # JWT token management
│   │   │   └── auth_service/ # Auth service modules
│   │   │       ├── mod.rs
│   │   │       ├── register.rs # User registration
│   │   │       ├── login.rs    # User login
│   │   │       ├── refresh_token.rs # Token refresh logic
│   │   │       ├── profile.rs  # Profile management
│   │   │       ├── password.rs # Password operations
│   │   │       └── slug.rs     # Username slug generation
│   │   ├── incident_timer/ # Timer business logic (modularized)
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs
│   │   │   ├── create.rs
│   │   │   ├── read.rs
│   │   │   ├── update.rs
│   │   │   └── delete.rs
│   │   ├── phrase/       # Phrase and suggestion business logic (modularized)
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs
│   │   │   ├── public_access.rs
│   │   │   ├── user_management.rs
│   │   │   ├── admin_management.rs
│   │   │   ├── exclusions.rs
│   │   │   └── suggestions.rs
│   │   └── admin/        # Admin services (modularized)
│   │       ├── mod.rs    # Admin service exports
│   │       ├── user_management/ # User management service modules
│   │       │   └── mod.rs # UserManagementService + 7 unit tests
│   │       ├── phrase_moderation/ # Phrase moderation service modules
│   │       │   └── mod.rs # PhraseModerationService + 5 unit tests
│   │       └── stats/    # Statistics service modules
│   │           └── mod.rs # StatsService + 3 unit tests
│   ├── middleware/       # Custom middleware
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Middleware exports
│   │   ├── auth.rs       # JWT validation with role extraction
│   │   └── admin.rs      # Admin role validation middleware
│   └── utils/            # Utility functions
├── migrations/           # SQLx migrations
│   ├── 20250914134643_initial_schema.sql
│   ├── 20250914134654_add_refresh_tokens_and_user_active.sql
│   └── 20250914134703_add_phrases_system.sql
├── tests/               # Test suite
│   ├── mod.rs           # Test module organization
│   ├── test_helpers.rs  # Test utilities
│   ├── refresh_token_validation.rs # Refresh token validation tests
│   └── api/             # API endpoint tests
│       ├── mod.rs
│       ├── testcontainers_auth_api_tests.rs # Authentication API tests
│       ├── testcontainers_incident_timer_api_tests.rs # Incident timer API tests
│       ├── testcontainers_phrase_api_tests.rs # Phrase API tests
│       ├── testcontainers_admin_api_tests.rs # Admin API tests
│       └── testcontainers_health_api_tests.rs # Health API tests
├── Cargo.toml           # Dependencies
├── Dockerfile           # Multi-stage container build
└── .env                 # Environment configuration
```

## Core Features
- **Authentication**: JWT-based with refresh tokens (see [IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md](IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md#authentication-system))
- **User Management**: Registration, login, slug generation, profile updates
- **Profile Management**: Display name and slug editing, password changes
- **Admin Management**: User deactivation, password reset, user promotion, system statistics
- **Incident Timers**: CRUD operations with user ownership
- **Phrases System**: Dynamic phrases with user suggestions and admin approval
- **Public API**: Unauthenticated access to user timers and phrases
- **Database Integration**: SQLx with compile-time query verification
- **3-Layer Architecture**: Clean separation with repository pattern and dependency injection
- **Modular Services**: Auth service split into focused modules (register, login, refresh, profile, password, slug)
- **Modular Incident Timer Service**: Split into focused modules (create, read, update, delete)
- **Modular Phrase Service**: Split into focused modules (public_access, user_management, admin_management, exclusions, suggestions)
- **Modular Admin Services**: Split into focused modules (user_management, phrase_moderation, stats)
- **Route Scoping**: Public/protected/admin route organization with appropriate middleware
- **Testing**: See [IMPLEMENTATION-TESTING.md](IMPLEMENTATION-TESTING.md) for comprehensive testing details

## Architecture Patterns

### 3-Layer Architecture
- **API Layer**: HTTP handlers in `routes/` directory with public/protected/admin scoping
- **Service Layer**: Business logic in `services/` directory using repository traits
- **Repository Layer**: Data access in `repositories/` directory with trait-based design

### Repository Pattern
- **Traits**: Abstract interfaces for all data operations
- **PostgreSQL Implementations**: Concrete implementations using SQLx
- **Mock Implementations**: Complete mock implementations for unit testing
- **Dependency Injection**: ServiceContainer manages all dependencies
- **Admin Repository**: Dedicated repository for admin operations and system statistics

### Service Layer
- **Repository Dependencies**: All services use repository traits instead of direct database access
- **Business Logic**: Clean separation from data access concerns
- **Error Handling**: Consistent error responses across endpoints
- **Testing**: Easy unit testing with mock repositories
- **Modular Design**: Auth service split into focused modules for maintainability
- **Admin Services**: Dedicated service layer for administrative operations

### API Layer
- **Route Handlers**: Use service layer exclusively
- **Middleware**: JWT validation and admin role validation via `actix_web::middleware::from_fn()`
- **Route Structure**: Three-tier scoping (public/protected/admin) with appropriate middleware
- **Error Handling**: Consistent error responses across endpoints
- **Service Injection**: Services injected via ServiceContainer for dependency management

### Service Container Pattern
- **Dependency Injection**: Centralized service management and configuration
- **Environment Awareness**: Development, testing, and production configurations
- **Repository Abstraction**: Services depend on traits, not concrete implementations
- **Testing Support**: Easy switching between real and mock implementations

## API Endpoints

### API Endpoints
For complete endpoint documentation and request/response contracts, see [IMPLEMENTATION-DATA-CONTRACTS.md](IMPLEMENTATION-DATA-CONTRACTS.md#api-endpoints).

For authentication and security details, see [IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md](IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md#api-security).

## Development Environment

### Installation Requirements
```bash
# Install Rust toolchain
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
source $HOME/.cargo/env

# Add useful tools
cargo install cargo-watch  # Auto-reload during development
cargo install sqlx-cli     # Database migrations
```

### Environment Configuration
Configuration via `backend/.env`. See [IMPLEMENTATION-DEPLOYMENT.md](IMPLEMENTATION-DEPLOYMENT.md#environment-configuration) for production setup.

### Running the Backend
The backend is typically run through development scripts:
```bash
# Start with hot reload (recommended)
./scripts/dev-start.sh backend

# View backend logs
./scripts/dev-logs.sh backend

# Direct cargo commands (if needed)
cd backend
cargo run
cargo test
```

## Testing

See [IMPLEMENTATION-TESTING.md](IMPLEMENTATION-TESTING.md) for comprehensive testing documentation.

## Database Integration
- **Connection**: SQLx with connection pooling
- **Migrations**: Managed via SQLx CLI
- **Schema**: See [IMPLEMENTATION-DATABASE.md](IMPLEMENTATION-DATABASE.md)
- **Query Safety**: Compile-time SQL verification

## Security
See [IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md](IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md) for authentication, authorization, and security implementation details.

## Docker Configuration
- **Multi-Stage Build**: Compilation + minimal Alpine runtime
- **Security**: Non-root user execution
- **Health Checks**: Built-in monitoring endpoints
- **Optimization**: Dependency caching for faster rebuilds

Commit message:

feat: optimize database queries and improve search performance
- Add comprehensive database indexes for better query performance
- Implement TABLESAMPLE for efficient random phrase selection
- Add full-text search support with tsvector and trigram indexes
- Optimize admin user queries with array_agg() for roles
- Update phrase repository with smart random selection logic
- Improve frontend search with debounced server-side filtering
- Update API contracts and service methods for pagination
- Add migration for database query optimization
- Update SQLx query cache with new optimized queries

IMPLEMENTATION-BACKEND.md, after:

# Backend Implementation

## Overview
Rust-based REST API using Actix-web 4.x with PostgreSQL integration and comprehensive test coverage. The backend has been refactored with a modular service architecture, enhanced admin capabilities, and comprehensive testing infrastructure.

## Technology Stack
- **Language**: Rust 1.89.0
- **Framework**: Actix-web 4.x
- **Database**: SQLx with PostgreSQL
- **Serialization**: Serde
- **Environment**: dotenv
- **Testing**: actix-test
- **Logging**: env_logger

## Project Structure
```
backend/
├── src/
│   ├── main.rs           # Application entry point
│   ├── lib.rs            # Library exports
│   ├── models/           # Database models
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Module exports
│   │   ├── user.rs       # User model + auth requests
│   │   ├── incident_timer.rs # Incident timer model
│   │   └── phrase.rs     # Phrase and suggestion models
│   ├── repositories/     # Repository layer (3-layer architecture)
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Repository exports
│   │   ├── traits/       # Repository trait definitions
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs
│   │   │   ├── user_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── refresh_token_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── incident_timer_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── phrase_repository.rs
│   │   │   └── admin_repository.rs
│   │   ├── postgres/     # PostgreSQL implementations
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs
│   │   │   ├── postgres_user_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── postgres_refresh_token_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── postgres_incident_timer_repository.rs
│   │   │   ├── postgres_phrase_repository.rs
│   │   │   └── postgres_admin_repository.rs
│   │   └── mocks/        # Mock implementations for testing
│   │       ├── mod.rs
│   │       ├── mock_user_repository.rs
│   │       ├── mock_refresh_token_repository.rs
│   │       ├── mock_incident_timer_repository.rs
│   │       ├── mock_phrase_repository.rs
│   │       └── mock_admin_repository.rs
│   ├── routes/           # API route handlers
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Route configuration with public/protected/admin scoping
│   │   ├── auth.rs       # Authentication endpoints
│   │   ├── incident_timers.rs # Timer CRUD + public endpoints
│   │   ├── phrases.rs    # Phrase management endpoints
│   │   ├── admin.rs      # Admin user management and phrase moderation endpoints
│   │   └── health.rs     # Health check endpoints
│   ├── services/         # Business logic layer
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Service exports
│   │   ├── container.rs  # ServiceContainer for dependency injection
│   │   ├── auth/         # Authentication services (modularized)
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs    # Auth service exports
│   │   │   ├── jwt.rs    # JWT token management
│   │   │   └── auth_service/ # Auth service modules
│   │   │       ├── mod.rs
│   │   │       ├── register.rs # User registration
│   │   │       ├── login.rs    # User login
│   │   │       ├── refresh_token.rs # Token refresh logic
│   │   │       ├── profile.rs  # Profile management
│   │   │       ├── password.rs # Password operations
│   │   │       └── slug.rs     # Username slug generation
│   │   ├── incident_timer/ # Timer business logic (modularized)
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs
│   │   │   ├── create.rs
│   │   │   ├── read.rs
│   │   │   ├── update.rs
│   │   │   └── delete.rs
│   │   ├── phrase/       # Phrase and suggestion business logic (modularized)
│   │   │   ├── mod.rs
│   │   │   ├── public_access.rs
│   │   │   ├── user_management.rs
│   │   │   ├── admin_management.rs
│   │   │   ├── exclusions.rs
│   │   │   └── suggestions.rs
│   │   └── admin/        # Admin services (modularized)
│   │       ├── mod.rs    # Admin service exports
│   │       ├── user_management/ # User management service modules
│   │       │   └── mod.rs # UserManagementService + 7 unit tests
│   │       ├── phrase_moderation/ # Phrase moderation service modules
│   │       │   └── mod.rs # PhraseModerationService + 5 unit tests
│   │       └── stats/    # Statistics service modules
│   │           └── mod.rs # StatsService + 3 unit tests
│   ├── middleware/       # Custom middleware
│   │   ├── mod.rs        # Middleware exports
│   │   ├── auth.rs       # JWT validation with role extraction
│   │   └── admin.rs      # Admin role validation middleware
│   └── utils/            # Utility functions
├── migrations/           # SQLx migrations
│   ├── 20250914134643_initial_schema.sql
│   ├── 20250914134654_add_refresh_tokens_and_user_active.sql
│   └── 20250914134703_add_phrases_system.sql
├── tests/               # Test suite
│   ├── mod.rs           # Test module organization
│   ├── test_helpers.rs  # Test utilities
│   ├── refresh_token_validation.rs # Refresh token validation tests
│   └── api/             # API endpoint tests
│       ├── mod.rs
│       ├── testcontainers_auth_api_tests.rs # Authentication API tests
│       ├── testcontainers_incident_timer_api_tests.rs # Incident timer API tests
│       ├── testcontainers_phrase_api_tests.rs # Phrase API tests
│       ├── testcontainers_admin_api_tests.rs # Admin API tests
│       └── testcontainers_health_api_tests.rs # Health API tests
├── Cargo.toml           # Dependencies
├── Dockerfile           # Multi-stage container build
└── .env                 # Environment configuration
```

## Core Features
- **Authentication**: JWT-based with refresh tokens (see [IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md](IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md#authentication-system))
- **User Management**: Registration, login, slug generation, profile updates
- **Profile Management**: Display name and slug editing, password changes
- **Admin Management**: User deactivation, password reset, user promotion, system statistics
- **Incident Timers**: CRUD operations with user ownership
- **Phrases System**: Dynamic phrases with user suggestions and admin approval
- **Enhanced Search**: PostgreSQL full-text search with `ts_rank` ranking and ILIKE fallback
- **Public API**: Unauthenticated access to user timers and phrases
- **Database Integration**: SQLx with compile-time query verification
- **3-Layer Architecture**: Clean separation with repository pattern and dependency injection
- **Modular Services**: Auth service split into focused modules (register, login, refresh, profile, password, slug)
- **Modular Incident Timer Service**: Split into focused modules (create, read, update, delete)
- **Modular Phrase Service**: Split into focused modules (public_access, user_management, admin_management, exclusions, suggestions)
- **Modular Admin Services**: Split into focused modules (user_management, phrase_moderation, stats)
- **Route Scoping**: Public/protected/admin route organization with appropriate middleware
- **Testing**: See [IMPLEMENTATION-TESTING.md](IMPLEMENTATION-TESTING.md) for comprehensive testing details

## Architecture Patterns

### 3-Layer Architecture
- **API Layer**: HTTP handlers in `routes/` directory with public/protected/admin scoping
- **Service Layer**: Business logic in `services/` directory using repository traits
- **Repository Layer**: Data access in `repositories/` directory with trait-based design

### Repository Pattern
- **Traits**: Abstract interfaces for all data operations
- **PostgreSQL Implementations**: Concrete implementations using SQLx
- **Mock Implementations**: Complete mock implementations for unit testing
- **Dependency Injection**: ServiceContainer manages all dependencies
- **Admin Repository**: Dedicated repository for admin operations and system statistics
- **Search Implementation**: PostgreSQL full-text search with `ts_rank` ranking and ILIKE fallback for phrase search

### Service Layer
- **Repository Dependencies**: All services use repository traits instead of direct database access
- **Business Logic**: Clean separation from data access concerns
- **Error Handling**: Consistent error responses across endpoints
- **Testing**: Easy unit testing with mock repositories
- **Modular Design**: Auth service split into focused modules for maintainability
- **Admin Services**: Dedicated service layer for administrative operations

### API Layer
- **Route Handlers**: Use service layer exclusively
- **Middleware**: JWT validation and admin role validation via `actix_web::middleware::from_fn()`
- **Route Structure**: Three-tier scoping (public/protected/admin) with appropriate middleware
- **Error Handling**: Consistent error responses across endpoints
- **Service Injection**: Services injected via ServiceContainer for dependency management

### Service Container Pattern
- **Dependency Injection**: Centralized service management and configuration
- **Environment Awareness**: Development, testing, and production configurations
- **Repository Abstraction**: Services depend on traits, not concrete implementations
- **Testing Support**: Easy switching between real and mock implementations

## API Endpoints

### API Endpoints
For complete endpoint documentation and request/response contracts, see [IMPLEMENTATION-DATA-CONTRACTS.md](IMPLEMENTATION-DATA-CONTRACTS.md#api-endpoints).

For authentication and security details, see [IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md](IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md#api-security).

## Development Environment

### Installation Requirements
```bash
# Install Rust toolchain
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
source $HOME/.cargo/env

# Add useful tools
cargo install cargo-watch  # Auto-reload during development
cargo install sqlx-cli     # Database migrations
```

### Environment Configuration
Configuration via `backend/.env`. See [IMPLEMENTATION-DEPLOYMENT.md](IMPLEMENTATION-DEPLOYMENT.md#environment-configuration) for production setup.

### Running the Backend
The backend is typically run through development scripts:
```bash
# Start with hot reload (recommended)
./scripts/dev-start.sh backend

# View backend logs
./scripts/dev-logs.sh backend

# Direct cargo commands (if needed)
cd backend
cargo run
cargo test
```

## Testing

See [IMPLEMENTATION-TESTING.md](IMPLEMENTATION-TESTING.md) for comprehensive testing documentation.

## Database Integration
- **Connection**: SQLx with connection pooling
- **Migrations**: Managed via SQLx CLI
- **Schema**: See [IMPLEMENTATION-DATABASE.md](IMPLEMENTATION-DATABASE.md)
- **Query Safety**: Compile-time SQL verification

## Security
See [IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md](IMPLEMENTATION-SECURITY.md) for authentication, authorization, and security implementation details.

## Docker Configuration
- **Multi-Stage Build**: Compilation + minimal Alpine runtime
- **Security**: Non-root user execution
- **Health Checks**: Built-in monitoring endpoints
- **Optimization**: Dependency caching for faster rebuilds
